
						8




Comments that appear nearly identical for the different sites reflect
information that was presented in the final EA's that was very similar among
sites.  Similar comments do, however, take into consideration differences
resulting from site-specific information.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

It is apparent that significant efforts were made by DOE to respond to the NRC
staff major comments on the draft EA's, and in fact many of these comments have
been resolved.  however, for each of the final EA's our review identified
remaining concerns many of which are the same type of concerns identified in
our review of the draft EA's such as 1) not identifying the range of
uncertainties associated with the existing limited data base, 2) not
identifying the range of alternative interpretations and assumptions that can
be reasonably supported by existing data, and 3) not incorporating a reasonable
range of uncertainties and alternative interpretations into evaluations and
conclusions.  Based on the above we believe that some conclusions in the final
EA's are still overly favorable or optimistic for the areas of comment.

In accordance with our review plan, the NRC staff also reviewed aspects of the
Methodology Document.  As mentioned earlier the NRC staff did not evaluate the
ranking of the sites or the ranking methodology itself.  Just as was done for
the draft EA's, the review focused on the existing data and how that data was
used in the evaluations in the final EA's and the Methodology Document.  From
this review it was clear that evaluations and conclusions regarding site
conditions presented in the final EA's were factored into the evaluations of
scenarios and their consequences presented in the Methodology Document.
Therefore, conclusions on repository performance in the Methodology Document
that were derived from evaluations and conclusions in the final EA's, that are
considered in our comments to be overly optimistic, are likewise considered to
be overly optimistic.  Some examples for the Hanford Site are 1) insufficient
consideration of flow along large, discrete faults and fracture zones that may
exist within dense flow interiors, including consideration of fracture flow as
an "unexpected" feature rather than an "expected" one, and 2) inadequate
consideration of alternative assumptions regarding pumping for the small-scale
exploratory drilling scenario.  Some factors which were not given sufficient
consideration for the salt sites are 1) effects of host rock mass
heterogeneities and 2) shaft and repository sealing concerns related to
thermally inducted salt creep and differential uplift.  An example from the
Yucca Mountain Site is the lack of consideration that hydrothermal activity
could be a future source of fluid important to waste package corrosion.  For
all sites, the effects of alternative corrosion mechanisms were not factored
into waste package lifetime analyses.  Finally, considering the examples noted
above, it is overly optimistic to state on p. 3-41 of the Methodology Document
that "When placed on a scale where a zero can be interpreted as performance at
the minimum level required by the primary-containment requirements of the EPA
standards and 1~~ is perfection, all of the sites have expected utilities of
99.7 or higher."


