
CHAPTER 4

DISSOLUTION OF SPECIFIC RADIONUCLIDES




4.1 INTRODUCTION

Separate, to some extent, from the question
of the breakdown and dissolution of the glass
matrix, is the question of the leaching or
dissolution of specific elements that are
deemed to be of particular importance. Those
elements of greatest significance to the long
term safety of a defense nuclear waste re-
pository are technetium, uranium, and the
transuranic elements.

Technetium, uranium and the transuranic ele-
ments, with their long half lives, are the
major radionuclides from the waste that sur-
vive well into the `geological' time period
of the repository. The sections that follow
discuss experimental results on the dis-
solution of these elements from the MCC
reference glass.

4.2 OXIDATION POTENTIALS IN GLASS
    DISSOLUTION

Many radionuclides of importance in nuclear
waste management occur in more than one va-
lence state. Usually the valence states have
different solubilities [e.g., U6+ (soluble)/
U4+ (insoluble) and Tc7+ (soluble) Tc4+
(nearly insoluble)]. The long-term leaching
behavior of waste forms will be a function of
the stable valence states of the various
radionuclides.

Reactions connecting different valence states
require an exchange of electrons in the same
way that acid-base reactions require an ex-
change of protons. Since most waste forms
are oxides, these reactions can be described
by oxidation potentials. In a complex system
such as a nuclear waste, there are many reac-
tions under way simultaneously. If the sys-
tem is to be at equilibrium (a situation that
is seldom obtained), all of these must be ad-
justed to a single oxidation potential which
may be regarded as a system master variable.

Lindberg and Runnells(a) analyzed 611 ground
water analyses for which a measured Eh and at
least one analyzed redox couple was present.
They reached the conclusion that no meaning-




ful statement can be made about redox poten-
tial in low ionic strength ground waters
because all of the pertinent reactions are
out of equilibrium. Although Eh can be meas-
ured, the relationship of the number obtained
to any redox reaction in the solutions is
problematic at best. The analogy between Eh
and pH breaks down, these authors argue,
because there is no free electron in solution
to act as an intermediary in redox reactions
the way in which the free proton acts as the
intermediary in acid-base reactions.

The extent to which nuclear waste dissolution
reactions are controlled by Eh is still open
to debate in spite of some fairly intensive
research over the past several years. It
will be shown in this report that Eh plays an
important role in the dissolution behavior of
both technetium and uranium. The extent to
which these effects can be described quanti-
tatively and incorporated into rate equations
is still open.

4.2.1 Concepts and Definitions

Redox equilibria are described in some detail
by Garrels and Christ (1965) and Stumm and
Morgan (1981). The short section that fol-
lows sets out the needed equations and
definitions.

Redox potential is usually described by Eh, a
macroscopic parameter related to the electron
activity. Consider the analogy to pH.




An equivalent parameter can be defined for
electrons.




(a) R. D. Lindberg and D. D. Runnells. "A
    Critical Analysis of the State of Equi-
    librium of Redox Reactions in Ground
    Waters, Applied to Eh Measurements and
    to Geochemical Modelling." Science (in
    press).




4.1

