
Under reducing conditions (up to Eh = 0.27-0.06pH), a reduction
to metallic Tc(s) is feasible. Dominating species in solution
would be TcO(OH)2, and possibly also TcO+ at low pH and highly
reducing conditions (Eh < 0.2-0.06pH), Fig. 1a.

Under mildly reducing conditions (Eh > 0.27-0.06pH) the solubi-
lity limiting phase would be TcO2(s), with TcO(OH)2 as domi-
nating soluble species up to Eh = 0.5-0.06pH, Fig. 1b.

The heptavalent state (TcO4-) would dominate at Eh > 0.5-0.06pH,
still with TcO2(s) as solubility limiting phase.

The total solubility under highly reducing conditions would be
as low as 10-9 M or below (less than ~g/l) and would increase to
10-4-10-5 M (mg/l-level) with increasing Eh (cf. Fig. 2). This
concentration, which would be constant at Eh between 0.27 and
0.45 V, is related to the choice of solubility product for
TcO2(s) and should be considered as a maximum value. By using
log Ks = -31, which was previously suggested (2), instead of
log Ks = -28.9 (Table 1) which is an assessed maximum value, the
resulting total technetium solubility at Eh between 0.27 and
0.45 V would be less than 10-6 M.

At Eh above 0.45-0.50 V the solubility is increasing up to at
least 10-1-10-2 M, which would be the solubility limit set by a
MTcO4(s)-species, assuming a concentration of monovalent cations
M+ of 0.1 M (g/l-level). This could possibly be achieved in very
saline waters, but rarely under groundwater conditions.

4 CONCLUSIONS

The following conclusions can be made concerning the solubility
of technetium in natural waters, particularly deep groundwaters.

o Under highly reducing conditions the solubility can be as low
as 10-9 M or below; a reduction to elementary technetium is
feasible.

