
208




of the fault is that of a tear fault, with horizontal movement
of the upper plate translated during folding into lateral tear
movement on the steep fault. Later downward movement has also
occurred on the Fall Canyon fault zone. Similarly the Thimble
fault acted as a break-away fault during folding, and along it
the upright Wood Canyon Formation and much of the Zabriskie
Quartzite were down-faulted eastward beneath the upper plate.
This accounts for the absence of the Wood Canyon Formation and
most of the Zabriskie in plates of the Titus Canyon fault.
  The eastern limit of pull-away of the upper limb dur-
ing folding must have been at or near the north-trending valley
on the east flank of Thimble Peak. East of that valley the Bo-
nanza King rests in conformable stratigraphic succession on the
Carrara Formation. Everywhere west and northwest of that val-
ley the Bonanza King is faulted against older beds.
  Evidence concerning the age of the folding with ac-
companying lag faulting is somewhat ambiguous. Southwest of
Leadfield, beds of the Oligocene Titus Canyon Formation are
faulted against beds of the Bonanza King along some faults that
do not extend into the lower plate. This might suggest that
folding and faulting could be at least as young as Oligocene.
Other bounding faults, however, do extend through the upper
plate into the lower. Because attitudes of Titus Canyon beds
in the fault blocks are discordant with underlying Cambrian
beds, dipping in opposite directions on one block, it is im-
probable that the beds were tilted at a common time during fold-
ing and lag-faulting. Rather, it is likely that the faults

